I've always found it quite interesting how giving something a name seems to
make it "real". Case in point? AJAX. When I first [heard][adpativepath] this
term, I thought to myself, "who really needs a specific term for a mishmash of
technologies that's been around for a long time?" Well, as is often the case, I
misunderestimated the importance of having a mental "handle" for an otherwise
complex concept. And just like [LAMP][lamp], it's not the specific technologies
that are important (the 'P' in LAMP is heavily overloaded, just as the 'XML' in
AJAX isn't as important as the idea of communicating directly with the server).

I don't know if I particularly care for the appelation -- particularly the XML
bit -- but that no longer really matters. The name has probably stuck now that
the WSJ has an article that opens with the words "Meet Ajax, the technology
powerhouse." So it's settled, the concept has a name now.

And I believe it is a good thing that *some* kind of name has stuck. For some
time now, I've found that everyone has their own ideas about what "rich" means
to a web application (or if you're more into Flash, an *internet* application);
and it just takes too long to try and explain "it's like the difference between
Hotmail and Outlook".

So now that we have a name, and an "AJAX" application has a specific meaning,
what do we do now? Certainly there is more than one way to approach the
problem. Should I use some sort of framework, or bang out all of the Javascript
by hand? How should I encode my server calls? How should I handle back button
support? What about URL-encoding my application's state? There is a host of
issues like these that need solutions (probably many solutions, depending upon
your needs). It's now time for us to begin gathering the existing solutions to
these problems, and to build new ones, so that we can move the Web far beyond
its current state.

Should be fun!

[adaptivepath]: http://www.adaptivepath.com/publications/essays/archives/000385.php
[lamp]: http://www.onlamp.com/

